The answer to this question is uncertain, but there are two likely possibilities. First,
the network initialization may encourage smoothness, and the model never departs from
the sub-domain of smooth function during the training process. Second, the training
algorithm may somehow “prefer” to converge to smooth functions. Any factor that
biases a solution toward a subset of equivalent solutions is known as a regularizer, so one
possibility is that the training algorithm acts as an implicit regularizer (see section 9.2).
8.5
Choosing hyperparameters
In the previous section, we discussed how test performance changes with model capac-
ity. Unfortunately, in the classical regime, we don’t have access to either the bias (which
requires knowledge of the true underlying function) or the variance (which requires mul-
tiple independently sampled datasets to estimate). In the modern regime, there is no
way to tell how much capacity should be added before the test error stops improving.
This raises the question of exactly how we should choose model capacity in practice.
For a deep network, the model capacity depends on the numbers of hidden layers
and hidden units per layer as well as other aspects of architecture that we have yet to
introduce. Furthermore, the choice of learning algorithm and any associated parameters
(learning rate, etc.) also affects the test performance. These elements are collectively
termed hyperparameters. The process of finding the best hyperparameters is termed
hyperparameter search or (when focused on network structure) neural architecture search.
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND license. (C) MIT Press.8.6 Summary
133
Hyperparameters are typically chosen empirically; we train many models with differ-
ent hyperparameters on the same training set, measure their performance, and retain the
best model. However, we do not measure their performance on the test set; this would
admit the possibility that these hyperparameters just happen to work well for the test
set but don’t generalize to further data. Instead, we introduce a third dataset known
as a validation set. For every choice of hyperparameters, we train the associated model
using the training set and evaluate performance on the validation set. Finally, we select
the model that worked best on the validation set and measure its performance on the
test set. In principle, this should give a reasonable estimate of the true performance.
The hyperparameter space is generally smaller than the parameter space but still
too large to try every combination exhaustively. Unfortunately, many hyperparameters
are discrete (e.g., the number of hidden layers), and others may be conditional on one
another (e.g., we only need to specify the number of hidden units in the tenth hidden
layer if there are ten or more layers). Hence, we cannot rely on gradient descent methods
as we did for learning the model parameters. Hyperparameter optimization algorithms
intelligently sample the space of hyperparameters, contingent on previous results. This
procedure is computationally expensive since we must train an entire model and measure
the validation performance for each combination of hyperparameters.
8.6 Summary
To measure performance, we use a separate test set. The degree to which performance is
maintained on this test set is known as generalization. Test errors can be explained by
three factors: noise, bias, and variance. These combine additively in regression problems
with least squares losses. Adding training data decreases the variance. When the model
capacity is less than the number of training examples, increasing the capacity decreases
bias but increases variance. This is known as the bias-variance trade-off, and there is a
capacity where the trade-off is optimal.
However, this is balanced against a tendency for performance to improve with ca-
pacity, even when the parameters exceed the training examples. Together, these two
phenomena create the double descent curve. It is thought that the model interpolates
more smoothly between the training data points in the over-parameterized “modern
regime,” although it is unclear what drives this. To choose the capacity and other model
and training algorithm hyperparameters, we fit multiple models and evaluate their per-
formance using a separate validation set.
Notes
Bias-variance trade-off: We showed that the test error for regression problems with least
squares loss decomposes into the sum of noise, bias, and variance terms. These factors are
all present for models with other losses, but their interaction is typically more complicated
(Friedman, 1997; Domingos, 2000). For classification problems, there are some counter-intuitive
Draft: please send errata to udlbookmail@gmail.com.134
8 Measuring performance
predictions; for example, if the model is biased toward selecting the wrong class in a region of
the input space, then increasing the variance can improve the classification rate as this pushes
some of the predictions over the threshold to be classified correctly.
Cross-validation: We saw that it is typical to divide the data into three parts: training
data (which is used to learn the model parameters), validation data (which is used to choose
the hyperparameters), and test data (which is used to estimate the final performance). This
approach is known as cross-validation. However, this division may cause problems where the
total number of data examples is limited; if the number of training examples is comparable to
the model capacity, then the variance will be large.
One way to mitigate this problem is to use k-fold cross-validation. The training and validation
data are partitioned into K disjoint subsets. For example, we might divide these data into
five parts. We train with four and validate with the fifth for each of the five permutations
and choose the hyperparameters based on the average validation performance. The final test
performance is assessed using the average of the predictions from the five models with the best
hyperparameters on an entirely different test set. There are many variations of this idea, but
all share the general goal of using a larger proportion of the data to train the model, thereby
reducing variance.
Capacity: We have used the term capacity informally to mean the number of parameters or
hidden units in the model (and hence indirectly, the ability of the model to fit functions of
increasing complexity). The representational capacity of a model describes the space of possible
functions it can construct when we consider all possible parameter values. When we take into
account the fact that an optimization algorithm may not be able to reach all of these solutions,
what is left is the effective capacity.
The Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC) dimension (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971) is a more formal
measure of capacity. It is the largest number of training examples that a binary classifier can
label arbitrarily. Bartlett et al. (2019) derive upper and lower bounds for the VC dimension in
terms of the number of layers and weights. An alternative measure of capacity is the Rademacher
complexity, which is the expected empirical performance of a classification model (with optimal
parameters) for data with random labels. Neyshabur et al. (2017) derive a lower bound on the
generalization error in terms of the Rademacher complexity.
Double descent: The term “double descent” was coined by Belkin et al. (2019), who demon-
strated that the test error decreases again in the over-parameterized regime for two-layer neural
networks and random features. They also claimed that this occurs in decision trees, although
Buschjäger & Morik (2021) subsequently provided evidence to the contrary. Nakkiran et al.
(2021) show that double descent occurs for various modern datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
IWSLT’14 de-en), architectures (CNNs, ResNets, transformers), and optimizers (SGD, Adam).
The phenomenon is more pronounced when noise is added to the target labels (Nakkiran et al.,
2021) and when some regularization techniques are used (Ishida et al., 2020).
Nakkiran et al. (2021) also provide empirical evidence that test performance depends on effective
model capacity (the largest number of samples for which a given model and training method can
achieve zero training error). At this point, the model starts to devote its efforts to interpolating
smoothly. As such, the test performance depends not just on the model but also on the training
algorithm and length of training. They observe the same pattern when they study a model with
fixed capacity and increase the number of training iterations. They term this epoch-wise double
descent. This phenomenon has been modeled by Pezeshki et al. (2022) in terms of different
features in the model being learned at different speeds.
Double descent makes the rather strange prediction that adding training data can sometimes
worsen test performance. Consider an over-parameterized model in the second descending part
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND license. (C) MIT Press.Notes
135
of the curve. If we increase the training data to match the model capacity, we will now be in
the critical region of the new test error curve, and the test loss may increase.
Bubeck & Sellke (2021) prove that overparameterization is necessary to interpolate data smoothly
in high dimensions. They demonstrate a trade-off between the number of parameters and the
Lipschitz constant of a model (the fastest the output can change for a small input change). A
review of the theory of over-parameterized machine learning can be found in Dar et al. (2021).
Appendix B.1.1
Lipschitz constant
Curse of dimensionality: As dimensionality increases, the volume of space grows so fast that
the amount of data needed to densely sample it increases exponentially. This phenomenon is
known as the curse of dimensionality. High-dimensional space has many unexpected properties,
and caution should be used when trying to reason about it based on low-dimensional exam-
ples. This book visualizes many aspects of deep learning in one or two dimensions, but these
visualizations should be treated with healthy skepticism.
Surprising properties of high-dimensional spaces include: (i) Two randomly sampled data points
from a standard normal distribution are very close to orthogonal to one another (relative to
the origin) with high likelihood. (ii) The distance from the origin of samples from a standard
normal distribution is roughly constant. (iii) Most of a volume of a high-dimensional sphere
(hypersphere) is adjacent to its surface (a common metaphor is that most of the volume of a high-
dimensional orange is in the peel, not in the pulp). (iv) If we place a unit-diameter hypersphere
inside a hypercube with unit-length sides, then the hypersphere takes up a decreasing proportion
of the volume of the cube as the dimension increases. Since the volume of the cube is fixed at
size one, this implies that the volume of a high-dimensional hypersphere becomes close to zero.
(v) For random points drawn from a uniform distribution in a high-dimensional hypercube, the
ratio of the Euclidean distance between the nearest and furthest points becomes close to one.
For further information, consult Beyer et al. (1999) and Aggarwal et al. (2001).
Real-world performance: In this chapter, we argued that model performance could be evalu-
ated using a held-out test set. However, the result won’t be indicative of real-world performance
if the statistics of the test set don’t match those of real-world data. Moreover, the statistics
of real-world data may change over time, causing the model to become increasingly stale and
performance to decrease. This is known as data drift and means that deployed models must be
carefully monitored.
There are three main reasons why real-world performance may be worse than the test perfor-
mance implies. First, the statistics of the input data x may change; we may now be observing
parts of the function that were sparsely sampled or not sampled at all during training. This
is known as covariate shift. Second, the statistics of the output data y may change; if some
output values are infrequent during training, then the model may learn not to predict these in
ambiguous situations and will make mistakes if they are more common in the real world. This
is known as prior shift. Third, the relationship between input and output may change. This is
known as concept shift. These issues are discussed in Moreno-Torres et al. (2012).
Hyperparameter search: Finding the best hyperparameters is a challenging optimization
task. Testing a single configuration of hyperparameters is expensive; we must train an entire
model and measure its performance. We have no easy way to access the derivatives (i.e., how
performance changes when we make a small change to a hyperparameter). Moreover, many of
the hyperparameters are discrete, so we cannot use gradient descent methods. There are multiple
local minima and no way to tell if we are close to the global minimum. The noise level is high
since each training/validation cycle uses a stochastic training algorithm; we expect different
results if we train a model twice with the same hyperparameters. Finally, some variables are
conditional and only exist if others are set. For example, the number of hidden units in the
third hidden layer is only relevant if we have at least three hidden layers.
Draft: please send errata to udlbookmail@gmail.com.
Problems 8.6–8.9
Notebook 8.4
High-dimensional
spaces8 Measuring performance
136
A simple approach is to sample the space randomly (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012). However,
for continuous variables, it is better to build a model of performance as a function of the
hyperparameters and the uncertainty in this function. This can be exploited to test where the
uncertainty is great (explore the space) or home in on regions where performance looks promising
(exploit previous knowledge). Bayesian optimization is a framework based on Gaussian processes
that does just this, and its application to hyperparameter search is described in Snoek et al.
(2012). The Beta-Bernoulli bandit (see Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) is a roughly equivalent
model for describing uncertainty in results due to discrete variables.
The sequential model-based configuration (SMAC) algorithm (Hutter et al., 2011) can cope with
continuous, discrete, and conditional parameters. The basic approach is to use a random forest
to model the objective function where the mean of the tree predictions is the best guess about
the objective function, and their variance represents the uncertainty. A completely different
approach that can also cope with combinations of continuous, discrete, and conditional param-
eters is Tree-Parzen Estimators (Bergstra et al., 2011). The previous methods modeled the
probability of the model performance given the hyperparameters. In contrast, the Tree-Parzen
estimator models the probability of the hyperparameters given the model performance.
Hyperband (Li et al., 2017b) is a multi-armed bandit strategy for hyperparameter optimization.
It assumes that there are computationally cheap but approximate ways to measure performance
(e.g., by not training to completion) and that these can be associated with a budget (e.g., by
training for a fixed number of iterations). A number of random configurations are sampled and
run until the budget is used up. Then the best fraction η of runs is kept, and the budget is
multiplied by 1/η. This is repeated until the maximum budget is reached. This approach has
the advantage of eﬀiciency; for bad configurations, it does not need to run the experiment to the
end. However, each sample is just chosen randomly, which is ineﬀicient. The BOHB algorithm
(Falkner et al., 2018) combines the eﬀiciency of Hyperband with the more sensible choice of
hyperparameters from Tree Parzen estimators to construct an even better method.
Problems
Problem 8.1 Will the multiclass cross-entropy training loss in figure 8.2 ever reach zero? Explain
your reasoning.
Problem 8.2 What values should we choose for the three weights and biases in the first layer of
the model in figure 8.4a so that the hidden unit’s responses are as depicted in figures 8.4b–d?
Problem 8.3∗ Given a training dataset consisting of I input/output pairs {xi , yi }, show how
the parameters {β, ω1 , ω2 , ω3 } for the model in figure 8.4a using the least squares loss function
can be found in closed form.
Problem 8.4 Consider the curve in figure 8.10b at the point where we train a model with a
hidden layer of size 200, which would have 50,410 parameters. What do you predict will happen
to the training and test performance if we increase the number of training examples from 10,000
to 50,410?
Problem 8.5 Consider the case where the model capacity exceeds the number of training data
points, and the model is flexible enough to reduce the training loss to zero. What are the
implications of this for fitting a heteroscedastic model? Propose a method to resolve any
problems that you identify.
Problem 8.6 Show that two random points drawn from a 1000-dimensional standard Gaussian
distribution are orthogonal relative to the origin with high probability